Either in this video we're going to continue looking at equality testing in floats and some of the issues
that arise because of the fact that floats cannot be stored exactly.
You know at least the binary representation of a float isn't necessarily a finite representation which
means we only have an approximation to the number that we want to store.
So for example we saw that if we take Ezekial zero point one then if we format X to actually display
let's say twenty five digits after the decimal point we end up with this number here.
Right.
So 0.1 even though pre-print X it will tell us zero point 1.
In fact it's not exactly zero point 1.
On the other hand we might have something like 0.1 to 5.
Now we know that that is equal to 1 8.
So that is a power of two in the denominator.
So we do have an exact representation for that.
So if we were to take this code again
then as you can see we do have 0.1 to 5 and then everything is 0 after that.
So that works right which means that if we do something like this XP equals zero point 1 2 5 plus 0
1 2 5 0 1 2 5 k.
So that's X and let's say we circle y equal to the sum of those three numbers which is 0.3 75 k then
if we say X equals equals Y that will return true.
Well that's because those two numbers one you know one plus one plus one eighth.
Those were exact representations.
So the sum becomes an exact or a finite representation.
And then why is the same thing it has a finite representation and the number of significant digits fits
within what can be handled by the float type in Python.
So that works.
But on the other hand if we do this let's look at 0.1 as we did before.
And let's say Weikel 0.3.
Then when we do X equals equals Y that turns out to be false.
And that's because 0.1 and 0.3 do not have finite binary representations.
Therefore they can all be stored as approximations in our float data type.
OK.
So how do we compare floats and we look at that in some detail in the previous video and we really have
two ways of doing it.
One is two rounds we could do something like this.
We could say round x comma three equals equals round.
Why can't a 3.
So we're rounding x and y to three decimal points.
Now what are x and y.
Let's just print that out quickly.
Let's print while it's format x 25 F.
helps if I type correctly.
OK.
So that's X and Y we can do the same thing to that.
And we get that.
So as we can see these two numbers are not exactly the same.
And so when we round them to three decimal points what's going to happen.
We get true right because it's rounding to 9 9 9 9 to zero point 3 0 0 which will be the same as this
round here.
The problem with round is that if you think about what round is doing it's basically doing a test to
see how close the two numbers are within an absolute tolerance.
Right because we're rounding to three digits after the decimal point was saying are they within the
you know that that that number here are they within 0.00 1 of each other essentially 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 3
0 0 0 1.
And of course that has problems that has problems.
And we saw that when we looked at the close method we looked at using absolute and relative tolerances
and we saw that absolute tolerances can be a problem when we're dealing with large numbers compared
to numbers close to zero.
So what do I mean by that.
Well if you take a look at two numbers let's say X equals ten thousand point 0 1 and let's say y equals
ten thousand point or two.
Now because of the magnitude of the two numbers we might really want to consider these two numbers to
be equal.
But what's the delta.
Well the delta here is equal to 0.1.
Right and right.
But that's the Delta.
And so the Delta zero point one and we would probably want to consider these two numbers as close to
each other.
On the other hand if we take zero point zero one and Weikel zero point zero one.
Well what's that.
Sorry zero point zero or two.
What's the delta here.
It is also zero point zero or 1 and yet relatively speaking x and y are very different from each other.
Why.
Well why is two times X right.
Why is it not 2 times X here.
It's a very small difference.
In fact if we're going to see what that is here we can just say why divided by x.
Give us an approximate value.
It's 1 point 0 0 0 0 9 9 9 times x.
Whereas hishe.
If we do that y divided by x we get that it's two times.
So that's kind of an issue right.
Because do we consider this close to we consider that close.
It kind of depends on the problems you're working with.
But generally speaking using this absolute tolerance is going to cause a problem because it might walk
and say yeah you know if I round these two numbers they're not close.
Now if I round them to let's say one decimal point then they're not close.
And if I don't also keep round 1 around 2 1 digit after the decimal point of these two numbers there
will also be considered not clocks.
Let's take a look at example.
Round x corner one day what does that give us that gives us zero point zero.
So if we do that and y come along where we get that true right there close to each other.
And in fact we probably would say no they're not close to each other relatively speaking.
On the other hand if we take x and y equal to those two values and then we round them off and check
up what happens.
It tells us that it's true.
And in that case yeah they're close enough because relatively speaking they're close to each other.
So for that reason we're going to use the as close method instead of the round method since the round
method really is only an absolute tolerance kind of technique.
So for that we're going to import so from the math we're going to import this is close method.
And if you want you can always get help on the method itself.
In the python Townsell this way we can see as we saw that it's close takes two parameters the two values
a and b that we want to check if they close to each other.
And then the relative and absolute tolerances which are optional parameters.
And if you don't specify relative tolerance it will default to this value here.
Tend to the negative 9.
And if you don't specify the absolute tolerance it will default to 0 which means in essence that if
you don't specify the absolute tolerance we're ending up with a method that only uses the relative tolerance
and as we saw before using only a relative tolerance can also cause problems.
The best way to deal with something that kind of fits just about any number you'll encounter as your
program is running is to use both relative and absolute tolerances.
So let's take a look at some examples of that.
So again let's go back to our standard of 1.
OK.
So we'll look at that and we're going to use the method as it is.
We're not going to specify the relative and absolute tolerances and we're going to ask whether they're
close.
And the answer is true.
OK.
So whereas if we are done X equals Y obviously we get false.
All right.
So that's kind of a very simplistic way of using the close method you just use the defaults.
It uses a relative tolerance and it kind of works.
But let's take a look at numbers like one two three four five one two three four five six seven eight
nine point or 1 and let's take it y equal one two three four five six seven eight nine point two just
to change up numbers a little bit.
So in this situation we might consider X and Y to be close to each other.
Why.
Because relatively speaking they are right.
But if we take X equal to zero point zero one.
And if we take Weikel to 0 1 0 2.
Well we don't consider those close to each other.
So let's go ahead and look at what happens if we use the as close method with those two numbers x and
y.
And here I'm going to specify a lower relative tolerance so will specify this.
And what do we get.
We get that it's true and which if we use is close x come y and we'll use the same relative tolerance.
That's the important point here that we don't have to change our relative tolerance and then we get
false which is kind of what we would expect.
Right.
I mean again depending on the problems you're walking with but 0.01 0.02 relatively speaking are very
different.
Whereas relatively speaking these two numbers are quite close to each other.
But we have to be careful when we deal with relative tolerances only because right now remember the
absolute tolerance is what it's zero.
Right.
It's not being used at all.
So we have to be careful with small numbers.
So let's take Ezekial zero point and it's put in 6 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 1.
And it's like Weikel Zero Point 1 2 3 4 5 6 2.
And let's look again at the close method of x and y.
And again we'll keep the relative tolerance to 0.01 and we get false.
Right.
So now we might be getting to a point where we're dealing with numbers where you know maybe we're only
dealing in digits or numbers that should be accurate up to two decimal points.
And so that's why we put our right of tolerance to that let's say.
But in this case this is told not close.
So that's the problem when you're very close to zero the relative tolerance is really going to cause
you a problem.
So we would want to use an absolute tolerance in this case.
Right.
We want to we would check and see is the Delta you know X minus Y absolute value is that less than or
equal to let's say 0.01 in which case I will say they're equal.
Right.
It kind of depends on how many significant digits you want to work with.
OK.
So what we can do here to fix this is to use the as close method again why we'll leave our road of tolerance
people to 0.01.
But now we're going to specify in absolute tolerance as well.
And let's say that we want the absolute tolerance to be also within 0.01 of each other.
And so now we get that it's true.
So that's why we want to combine relative an absolute tolerances is because we can set those tolerances
up you know once and for all in our program it's rare that you would change your tolerance levels as
your program is running because you don't know what numbers you're expecting.
You don't necessarily you might know the ranges that you're expecting and therefore you can set up ahead
of time and determine what your relative and absolute tolerances should be when you're comparing floats.
But in general you're not changing your tolerances as your program is running because you don't know
what numbers are coming at you.
So you set them up and you set both the relative and the absolute up.
And that way I can handle most cases.
So let's take a look at another example.
So again 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 why pools.
One two three four five six and two minutes they equal two.
Now that big number we had before.
OK.
And people equal to 1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 0 2.
And now we're going to print is a close X-Com AYSO will take the first two numbers will set up an absolute
tolerance of zero point zero zero.
Let's say 0 1.
Let's say we want to go there for the absolute Tarrant's.
So if numbers absolutely are within zero point zero zero zero one of each other they're considered close.
Right.
But of course we also specify the relative tolerance so that as the numbers get larger then the absolute
tolerance maybe doesn't matter as much.
And we wanted to see if relatively speaking they're close to each other for small numbers.
We look at absolute tolerances large numbers we'll look at relative tolerances so let's do that.
And let's also do the same thing right now in both of these cases we would consider these two numbers
to be let's say close to each of because you know they're quite close they're within that tolerance
absolutely given.
Absolutely speaking.
And these two well they're definitely not within zero point 0 0 0 1 of each other.
But relatively speaking those two numbers are pretty close to each other.
So I know I'm rehashing this stuff a lot but it takes some getting used to.
And then we'll just specify the same.
And that's the important part here is that we can specify the same absolute and relative tolerances.
We don't have to change them according to the numbers that we're examining.
And as you can see we get that both are true.
OK.
So this kind of wraps up how we look at a quality testing for floats and so we have to be a little careful.
It's not as simple as using an equals equals and even rounding although it can work in some cases doesn't
work properly when we're talking about relative and absolute tolerances since rounding basically only
does an absolute tolerance check.
Our thanks for watching.
I'll see you in the next video.